content/modules/ROOT/pages/fine-tuning-workshop.adoc, before:

// modules/ROOT/pages/fine-tuning-workshop.adoc
= Fine‑Tuning & Customizing Model Responses
:page-description: Full workflow for fine‑tuning with InstructLab

Fine‑tuning a large language model involves adapting a pre‑trained model by further training it on new, task‑specific data. This allows the model to produce more relevant, accurate, and context‑aware outputs that align precisely with enterprise‑specific use cases. Here's where InstructLab comes in- by simplifying this traditionally complex process by providing a structured, synthetic data generation (SDG) method and fine-tuning process, all from a command line interface (CLI). 

image::instructlab.png[InstructLab,100%,100%]

[[alignment]]
== How InstructLab Helps Align Models

Originally started as a research project from the MIT-Watson lab and IBM Research, InstructLab addresses critical limitations in general‑purpose foundation models, particularly their inherent lack of domain‑specific expertise and tendency to hallucinate incorrect information, without needing full-retraining of the model. But, a large issue for model training is the large amount of data needed to train these _large_ language models as well! 

//— Taxonomy‑Driven Data Curation
[[taxonomy]]
=== Taxonomy‑Driven Data Curation

Effective alignment begins with clearly structured data. InstructLab employs a taxonomy‑driven approach, organizing enterprise‑specific information into a logical, hierarchical folder structure. This taxonomy consists of distinct categories—*foundational skills* (e.g., math, writing), *compositional skills* (e.g., extraction from technical manuals), and specialized *knowledge* areas (e.g., historical texts).

image::instructlab-taxonomy.png[InstructLab,100%,100%]

By structuring data in a clear, hierarchical format and pairing it with precise question‑and‑answer examples (`qna.yaml`), the synthetic data generation process is guided precisely, ensuring the produced training dataset closely mirrors your enterprise’s unique needs.

//— Large‑Scale Synthetic Data Generation
[[sdg]]
=== Large‑Scale Synthetic Data Generation

To effectively fine‑tune models, you need extensive, high‑quality training data. InstructLab uses an automated synthetic data generation strategy that deeply aligns the model with enterprise‑specific knowledge and skills. The synthetic data process leverages a local teacher model to help generate high‑quality synthetic data based on enterprise documents and carefully curated seed examples (in the format of a `qna.yaml` text document). This significantly expanding your training datasets based on initial Q&A seed examples and becomes the training set to fine‑tune foundation models, such as the Mistral or Granite, to address specialized tasks with enhanced precision and context‑awareness.

// from article
image::synthetic-data-image.png[InstructLab,100%,100%]

//— Model Training with New Data
[[model-training]]
=== Model Training with New Data

Once synthetic data is curated and generated, InstructLab utilizes phased, large‑scale alignment tuning—training your model iteratively in multiple stages, first on general knowledge and then refining it with specialized enterprise skills. This structured training approach ensures models not only understand broad concepts but can also perform specific, nuanced tasks effectively.

// from article
image::training-image.png[InstructLab,100%,100%]

[[enterprise-data-value]]
== The Value in Enterprise Data

It is estimated that only about 1% of enterprise data is represented in popular large language models. This minimal coverage significantly restricts the models' capability to understand and interact meaningfully within specific organizational contexts. For example, at 404 Airlines, we know our internal policies and guidelines, but models are likely to not know or be trained on this information. For example our policies state the following:

```
- **Standard Allowance:** Each passenger is permitted one piece of carry-on baggage.
- **Size Limitations:** Maximum dimensions are 22 inches (length) x 14 inches (width) x 9 inches (height). Items must fit in the overhead bin or under the seat.
- **Weight Limit:** Total weight must not exceed 15 lbs (6.8 kg).
```

Now, this is important information that our models should *always* know, and so fine-tuning this information into the model is critical to having an AI assistant which is actually helpful. But, what do language models actually know?

. Let's actually test this out with model that has been pre-downloaded for you, specifically the Merlinite model from Hugging Face, by running the following command in the *uppper* Terminal window.

.Command
[source,console,role=execute,subs=attributes+]
----
ilab model serve
----

TIP: This command points to the default model in InstructLab's `config.yaml`, but you can download and serve others using `ilab model download` and `ilab model serve -–model-path` as an argument to point to specific models.

Once the model is served and ready, you will see the following output:

.Output
[source,console,subs=quotes,copy=false]
----
INFO 2024-09-10 18:12:09,459 instructlab.model.serve:145: Using model '/home/instruct/.cache/instructlab/models/granite-7b-lab-Q4_K_M.gguf' with -1 gpu-layers and 4096 max context size.
INFO 2024-09-10 18:12:09,459 instructlab.model.serve:149: Serving model '/home/instruct/.cache/instructlab/models/granite-7b-lab-Q4_K_M.gguf' with llama-cpp
INFO 2024-09-10 18:12:16,023 instructlab.model.backends.llama_cpp:250: Replacing chat template:
 {% for message in messages %}
{% if message['role'] == 'user' %}
{{ '<|user|>
' + message['content'] }}
{% elif message['role'] == 'system' %}
{{ '<|system|>
' + message['content'] }}
{% elif message['role'] == 'assistant' %}
{{ '<|assistant|>
' + message['content'] + eos_token }}
{% endif %}
{% if loop.last and add_generation_prompt %}
{{ '<|assistant|>' }}
{% endif %}
{% endfor %}
INFO 2024-09-10 18:12:16,026 instructlab.model.backends.llama_cpp:193: Starting server process, press CTRL+C to shutdown server...
INFO 2024-09-10 18:12:16,026 instructlab.model.backends.llama_cpp:194: After application startup complete see http://127.0.0.1:8000/docs for API.
----

Because you are serving the model in one terminal window, we provided a separate terminal window for interactions.

[start=2]
. In the *bottom* terminal window, you can begin a chat session with the `ilab chat` command:

.Command
[source,console,role=execute,subs=attributes+]
----
ilab model chat
----

You should see a chat prompt like the example below.

.Output
[source,console,copy=false]
----
╭───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Welcome to InstructLab Chat w/ GRANITE-7B-LAB-Q4_K_M.GGUF (type /h for help)                                                                                                                                      
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
>>> 
----

[start=3]
. At this point, you can interact with the model by asking it a question. Example:

.Command
[source,console,role=execute,subs=attributes+]
----
As a customer service assistant for 404 Airlines, what are the baggage rules for passengers, and when does check in open?
----

The answer will almost certainly be incorrect, as shown in the following example output:

.Output
[source,console]
----
test output
----

NOTE: LLMs by nature are non-deterministic. This means that even with the same prompt input, the model will produce varying responses. So, your results may vary.

Wow, that was both pretty awesome and sad at the same time! Kudos for it generating a response that appears to be very accurate and it was very confident in doing so. _However, it is incorrect_. The policies that were given look detailed but are wrong, and this can be misleading for both our agents and customers at 404 Airlines. These errors are often referred to as “hallucinations” in the LLM space.

Model alignment and fine-tuning (like you’re about to do) is one of the ways to improve a model’s answers and avoid hallucinations. In this workshop, we are going to focus on adding a new knowledge to the model so that it can be helpful for the team of customer service agents. Let’s get to work!

[start=3]
. When you are done exploring the model, **exit the chat** by issuing the exit command within in the chat session:

.Command
[source,console,role=execute,subs=attributes+]
----
exit
----

//— Curating the InstructLab Taxonomy & Best Practices
[[best-practices]]
== Curating the InstructLab Taxonomy & Best Practices

Let's apply what we've learned in order to curate initial seed training data to fine-tune a model for 404 Airlines! Effective taxonomy curation is foundational to achieving optimal results when using InstructLab. As mentioned before, the taxonomy serves as the model's data organization and source of truth, impacting the synthetic data generation pipeline and subsequent fine‑tuning processes. When carefully curating a Question & Answer (`qna.yaml`) file for our taxonomy, you'll typically go through a few steps and should know these guidelines:

// turn this into a table
* **Domain Identification:** Define your domain and keep taxonomy content within scope, e.g., airline policy (_knowledge_) or customer service tone & procedures (_skill_)
* **Seed Data Preparation (`qna.yaml`):** Use explicit context snippets verbatim from source documents, paired with diverse Q&A examples.
* **Data Diversity:** Reflect different content types—definitions, procedures, tables—to generate robust synthetic data.
* **Token Management:** Keep context + Q&A near ~750 tokens (~550 words) to avoid input limits.

//— Curating Our Unique Airline Seed Data
[[airline-seed-data]]
== Curating Our Unique Airline Seed Data with InstructLab

In this workshop, we'll fine‑tune a model specifically for 404 Airlines to cover the following domain and topic areas:

|===
| Operational Procedures    | Customer Service Guidelines      | Safety and Compliance

| Check‑in policies          | Ticketing policies               | Aviation safety protocols
| Boarding procedures        | Baggage rules                    | Regulatory compliance documentation
| Emergency response guides  | Cancellation & refund procedures | Incident reporting processes
|===

Thus, we'll seperate each topic into a unique `qna.yaml` to cover the domain and teach the model specific intuition/knowledge about the topic areas for it to respond better in situations of check-in, customer service policy, and compliance. Let's take a look at the basic components that these files require as seed data for the model curation.

//— Preparing Seed Data
[[preparing-seed-data]]
== Preparing Seed Data (`qna.yaml`) for Model Tuning

As a requirement, each seed data entry file includes question & answer pairs that are used to guide the model's intuition, and be used for more synthetic data generation to expand our model training dataset. Let's take a look a what an example looks like:

[source,yaml]
----
version: 3
domain: astronomy
created_by: juliadenham
seed_examples:
  - context: |
      **Phoenix** is a minor [constellation](constellation "wikilink") in the
      [southern sky](southern_sky "wikilink"). Named after the mythical
      [phoenix](Phoenix_(mythology) "wikilink"), it was first depicted on a
      celestial atlas by [Johann Bayer](Johann_Bayer "wikilink") in his 1603
      *[Uranometria](Uranometria "wikilink")*. The French explorer and
      astronomer [Nicolas Louis de
      Lacaille](Nicolas_Louis_de_Lacaille "wikilink") charted the brighter
      stars and gave their [Bayer designations](Bayer_designation "wikilink")
      in 1756. The constellation stretches from roughly −39 degrees to −57 degrees
      [declination](declination "wikilink"), and from 23.5h to 2.5h of [right
      ascension](right_ascension "wikilink"). The constellations Phoenix,
      [Grus](Grus_(constellation) "wikilink"),
      [Pavo](Pavo_(constellation) "wikilink") and [Tucana](Tucana "wikilink"),
      are known as the Southern Birds.
    questions_and_answers:
      - question: |
          What is the Phoenix constellation?
        answer: |
          Phoenix is a minor constellation in the southern sky.
      - question: |
          Who charted the Phoenix constellation?
        answer: |
          The French explorer and astronomer Nicolas Louis de Lacaille charted its brighter stars in 1756.
      - question: |
          When was Phoenix first depicted on a celestial atlas?
        answer: |
          It first appeared in Johann Bayer’s 1603 *Uranometria*.
      - question: |
          What are the declination and right ascension ranges of Phoenix?
        answer: |
          It spans roughly −39° to −57° declination and 23.5h to 2.5h right ascension.
      - question: |
          Which nearby constellations form the “Southern Birds” along with Phoenix?
        answer: |
          Grus, Pavo, and Tucana.
document_outline: |
  Information about the Phoenix Constellation including its discovery, boundaries, and relation to nearby constellations.
document:
  repo: https://github.com/juliadenham/Summit_knowledge
  commit: 0a1f2672b9b90582e6115333e3ed62fd628f1c0f
  patterns:
    - phoenix_constellation.md
----

. `**version**`: The version of the qna.yaml file, this is the format of the file used for SDG. The value must be the number 3 for this workshop.
. `**created_by**`: Your GitHub username.
. `**domain**`: Specify the category of the knowledge.
. `**seed_examples**`: A collection of key/value entries.
.. `**context**`: A chunk of information from the knowledge document. Each qna.yaml needs five context blocks and has a maximum word count of 500 words.
.. `**questions_and_answers**`: The parameter that holds your questions and answers
... `**question**`: Specify a question for the model. Each qna.yaml file needs at least three question and answer pairs per context chunk with a maximum word count of 250 words.
... `**answer**`: Specify the desired answer from the model. Each qna.yaml file needs at least three question and answer pairs per context chunk with a maximum word count of 250 words.
. `**document_outline**`: Describe an overview of the document your submitting.
. `**document**`: The source of your knowledge contribution.
.. `**repo**`: The URL to your repository that holds your knowledge markdown files.
.. `**commit**`: The SHA of the commit in your repository with your knowledge markdown files.
.. `**patterns**`: A list of glob patterns specifying the markdown files in your repository. Any glob pattern that starts with *, such as *.md, must be quoted due to YAML rules. For example, *.md.

IMPORTANT: To be concise, here we're abbreviating the `questions_and_answers` section to only show a few examples. In practice, you'll need to provide five context blocks, each with at least three question and answer pairs. This ensures the model has a rich set of examples to learn from.

While adding to the taxonomy, it's also important to include sources to the contribution you are providing. This is important for providing transparency and traceability to the model, and as an example, we'd typically include an `attribution.txt` file in the same directory as the `qna.yaml` file. This file should include the following:

[source,yaml]
----
Title of work: Phoenix (constellation)
Link to work: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phoenix_(constellation)
Revision: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Phoenix_(constellation)&oldid=1237187773
License of the work: CC-BY-SA-4.0
Creator names: Wikipedia Authors
----


//— Generating Synthetic Data
[[generate-synthetic-data]]
== Let’s Generate Synthetic Data!

Now that you've curated your seed examples (`qna.yaml` files), it's time to expand them into a rich training dataset using InstructLab’s Synthetic Data Generation (SDG) pipeline.

In the *Lower Terminal*, run:

[source,bash]
----
ilab generate
----

This will use a "teacher" model to generate dozens of new Q&A examples based on the patterns in your `qna.yaml` file. These synthetic examples are automatically aligned with your taxonomy and formatted to train the model effectively.

Once generation completes, your new dataset will be located inside:

[source,bash]
----
taxonomy/knowledge/[your-domain]/[subdomain]/generated/
----



//— Fine‑Tuning The Model
[[fine-tuning-model]]
== Fine‑Tuning The Model With Our New Dataset

With your synthetic data ready, let’s move on to fine-tuning.

Fine-tuning trains the model in multiple phases:

* *General phase* – Aligns with broadly applicable skills.
* *Specialized phase* – Sharpens the model with enterprise-specific tasks (in our case, 404 Airlines policies and procedures).

In the *Lower Terminal*, run:

[source,bash]
----
ilab train
----

The model will begin consuming the synthetic dataset and gradually adjust its internal weights. This may take several minutes depending on your hardware.

Behind the scenes, InstructLab uses QLoRA, a lightweight fine-tuning method that makes training feasible on consumer-grade GPUs or CPUs.

Once complete, your newly fine-tuned model will be saved in the following directory:

[source,bash]
----
models/
----


//— Testing The Model
[[testing-model]]
== Testing the Model’s Responses

Now it’s time to interact with the model and see what it learned.

In the *Upper Terminal*, start the model server:

[source,bash]
----
ilab serve --model-path ./models/<your-finetuned-model>.gguf
----

Once the model is running, activate your Python environment in another terminal window:

[source,bash]
----
source venv/bin/activate
----

Then launch an interactive chat session:

[source,bash]
----
ilab chat
----

Try asking 404 Airlines-specific questions like:

[source,text]
----
What’s the maximum carry-on size for economy passengers?
How does 404 Airlines handle refunds for weather-related cancellations?
----

Observe how well the model responds. If answers are inaccurate or incomplete, revisit your `qna.yaml` examples or review your taxonomy structure for improvements.

Commit message:

Update example prompts and outputs for 404 Airlines baggage rules in fine-tuning workshop

content/modules/ROOT/pages/fine-tuning-workshop.adoc, after:

// modules/ROOT/pages/fine-tuning-workshop.adoc
= Fine‑Tuning & Customizing Model Responses
:page-description: Full workflow for fine‑tuning with InstructLab

Fine‑tuning a large language model involves adapting a pre‑trained model by further training it on new, task‑specific data. This allows the model to produce more relevant, accurate, and context‑aware outputs that align precisely with enterprise‑specific use cases. Here's where InstructLab comes in- by simplifying this traditionally complex process by providing a structured, synthetic data generation (SDG) method and fine-tuning process, all from a command line interface (CLI). 

image::instructlab.png[InstructLab,100%,100%]

[[alignment]]
== How InstructLab Helps Align Models

Originally started as a research project from the MIT-Watson lab and IBM Research, InstructLab addresses critical limitations in general‑purpose foundation models, particularly their inherent lack of domain‑specific expertise and tendency to hallucinate incorrect information, without needing full-retraining of the model. But, a large issue for model training is the large amount of data needed to train these _large_ language models as well! 

//— Taxonomy‑Driven Data Curation
[[taxonomy]]
=== Taxonomy‑Driven Data Curation

Effective alignment begins with clearly structured data. InstructLab employs a taxonomy‑driven approach, organizing enterprise‑specific information into a logical, hierarchical folder structure. This taxonomy consists of distinct categories—*foundational skills* (e.g., math, writing), *compositional skills* (e.g., extraction from technical manuals), and specialized *knowledge* areas (e.g., historical texts).

image::instructlab-taxonomy.png[InstructLab,100%,100%]

By structuring data in a clear, hierarchical format and pairing it with precise question‑and‑answer examples (`qna.yaml`), the synthetic data generation process is guided precisely, ensuring the produced training dataset closely mirrors your enterprise’s unique needs.

//— Large‑Scale Synthetic Data Generation
[[sdg]]
=== Large‑Scale Synthetic Data Generation

To effectively fine‑tune models, you need extensive, high‑quality training data. InstructLab uses an automated synthetic data generation strategy that deeply aligns the model with enterprise‑specific knowledge and skills. The synthetic data process leverages a local teacher model to help generate high‑quality synthetic data based on enterprise documents and carefully curated seed examples (in the format of a `qna.yaml` text document). This significantly expanding your training datasets based on initial Q&A seed examples and becomes the training set to fine‑tune foundation models, such as the Mistral or Granite, to address specialized tasks with enhanced precision and context‑awareness.

// from article
image::synthetic-data-image.png[InstructLab,100%,100%]

//— Model Training with New Data
[[model-training]]
=== Model Training with New Data

Once synthetic data is curated and generated, InstructLab utilizes phased, large‑scale alignment tuning—training your model iteratively in multiple stages, first on general knowledge and then refining it with specialized enterprise skills. This structured training approach ensures models not only understand broad concepts but can also perform specific, nuanced tasks effectively.

// from article
image::training-image.png[InstructLab,100%,100%]

[[enterprise-data-value]]
== The Value in Enterprise Data

It is estimated that only about 1% of enterprise data is represented in popular large language models. This minimal coverage significantly restricts the models' capability to understand and interact meaningfully within specific organizational contexts. For example, at 404 Airlines, we know our internal policies and guidelines, but models are likely to not know or be trained on this information. For example our policies state the following:

```
- **Standard Allowance:** Each passenger is permitted one piece of carry-on baggage.
- **Size Limitations:** Maximum dimensions are 22 inches (length) x 14 inches (width) x 9 inches (height). Items must fit in the overhead bin or under the seat.
- **Weight Limit:** Total weight must not exceed 15 lbs (6.8 kg).
```

Now, this is important information that our models should *always* know, and so fine-tuning this information into the model is critical to having an AI assistant which is actually helpful. But, what do language models actually know?

. Let's actually test this out with model that has been pre-downloaded for you, specifically the Merlinite model from Hugging Face, by running the following command in the *uppper* Terminal window.

.Command
[source,console,role=execute,subs=attributes+]
----
ilab model serve
----

TIP: This command points to the default model in InstructLab's `config.yaml`, but you can download and serve others using `ilab model download` and `ilab model serve -–model-path` as an argument to point to specific models.

Once the model is served and ready, you will see the following output:

.Output
[source,console,subs=quotes,copy=false]
----
INFO 2024-09-10 18:12:09,459 instructlab.model.serve:145: Using model '/home/instruct/.cache/instructlab/models/granite-7b-lab-Q4_K_M.gguf' with -1 gpu-layers and 4096 max context size.
INFO 2024-09-10 18:12:09,459 instructlab.model.serve:149: Serving model '/home/instruct/.cache/instructlab/models/granite-7b-lab-Q4_K_M.gguf' with llama-cpp
INFO 2024-09-10 18:12:16,023 instructlab.model.backends.llama_cpp:250: Replacing chat template:
 {% for message in messages %}
{% if message['role'] == 'user' %}
{{ '<|user|>
' + message['content'] }}
{% elif message['role'] == 'system' %}
{{ '<|system|>
' + message['content'] }}
{% elif message['role'] == 'assistant' %}
{{ '<|assistant|>
' + message['content'] + eos_token }}
{% endif %}
{% if loop.last and add_generation_prompt %}
{{ '<|assistant|>' }}
{% endif %}
{% endfor %}
INFO 2024-09-10 18:12:16,026 instructlab.model.backends.llama_cpp:193: Starting server process, press CTRL+C to shutdown server...
INFO 2024-09-10 18:12:16,026 instructlab.model.backends.llama_cpp:194: After application startup complete see http://127.0.0.1:8000/docs for API.
----

Because you are serving the model in one terminal window, we provided a separate terminal window for interactions.

[start=2]
. In the *bottom* terminal window, you can begin a chat session with the `ilab chat` command:

.Command
[source,console,role=execute,subs=attributes+]
----
ilab model chat
----

You should see a chat prompt like the example below.

.Output
[source,console,copy=false]
----
╭───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╮
│ Welcome to InstructLab Chat w/ GRANITE-7B-LAB-Q4_K_M.GGUF (type /h for help)                                                                                                                                      
╰───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────╯
>>> 
----

[start=3]
. At this point, you can interact with the model by asking it a question. Example:

.Command
[source,console,role=execute,subs=attributes+]
----
What are the maximum dimensions (length, width, and height) for carry-on baggage on 404 Airlines?
----

The answer will almost certainly be incorrect, as shown in the following example output:

.Output
[source,console]
----
The maximum dimensions for carry-on baggage on 404 Airlines are 55 cm × 38 cm × 25 cm (approximately 21.6 in × 14.9 in × 9.8 in) in length, width, and height, respectively. This information is accurate as of April 2023 and may be subject to change, so it’s always a good idea to double-check with the airline directly for the most up-to-date information.
----

NOTE: LLMs by nature are non-deterministic. This means that even with the same prompt input, the model will produce varying responses. So, your results may vary.

Wow, that was both pretty awesome and sad at the same time! Kudos for it generating a response that appears to be very accurate and it was very confident in doing so. _However, it is incorrect_. The policies that were given look detailed but are wrong, and this can be misleading for both our agents and customers at 404 Airlines. These errors are often referred to as “hallucinations” in the LLM space.

Model alignment and fine-tuning (like you’re about to do) is one of the ways to improve a model’s answers and avoid hallucinations. In this workshop, we are going to focus on adding a new knowledge to the model so that it can be helpful for the team of customer service agents. Let’s get to work!

[start=3]
. When you are done exploring the model, **exit the chat** by issuing the exit command within in the chat session:

.Command
[source,console,role=execute,subs=attributes+]
----
exit
----

//— Curating the InstructLab Taxonomy & Best Practices
[[best-practices]]
== Curating the InstructLab Taxonomy & Best Practices

Let's apply what we've learned in order to curate initial seed training data to fine-tune a model for 404 Airlines! Effective taxonomy curation is foundational to achieving optimal results when using InstructLab. As mentioned before, the taxonomy serves as the model's data organization and source of truth, impacting the synthetic data generation pipeline and subsequent fine‑tuning processes. When carefully curating a Question & Answer (`qna.yaml`) file for our taxonomy, you'll typically go through a few steps and should know these guidelines:

// turn this into a table
* **Domain Identification:** Define your domain and keep taxonomy content within scope, e.g., airline policy (_knowledge_) or customer service tone & procedures (_skill_)
* **Seed Data Preparation (`qna.yaml`):** Use explicit context snippets verbatim from source documents, paired with diverse Q&A examples.
* **Data Diversity:** Reflect different content types—definitions, procedures, tables—to generate robust synthetic data.
* **Token Management:** Keep context + Q&A near ~750 tokens (~550 words) to avoid input limits.

//— Curating Our Unique Airline Seed Data
[[airline-seed-data]]
== Curating Our Unique Airline Seed Data with InstructLab

In this workshop, we'll fine‑tune a model specifically for 404 Airlines to cover the following domain and topic areas:

|===
| Operational Procedures    | Customer Service Guidelines      | Safety and Compliance

| Check‑in policies          | Ticketing policies               | Aviation safety protocols
| Boarding procedures        | Baggage rules                    | Regulatory compliance documentation
| Emergency response guides  | Cancellation & refund procedures | Incident reporting processes
|===

Thus, we'll seperate each topic into a unique `qna.yaml` to cover the domain and teach the model specific intuition/knowledge about the topic areas for it to respond better in situations of check-in, customer service policy, and compliance. Let's take a look at the basic components that these files require as seed data for the model curation.

//— Preparing Seed Data
[[preparing-seed-data]]
== Preparing Seed Data (`qna.yaml`) for Model Tuning

As a requirement, each seed data entry file includes question & answer pairs that are used to guide the model's intuition, and be used for more synthetic data generation to expand our model training dataset. Let's take a look a what an example looks like:

[source,yaml]
----
version: 3
domain: astronomy
created_by: juliadenham
seed_examples:
  - context: |
      **Phoenix** is a minor [constellation](constellation "wikilink") in the
      [southern sky](southern_sky "wikilink"). Named after the mythical
      [phoenix](Phoenix_(mythology) "wikilink"), it was first depicted on a
      celestial atlas by [Johann Bayer](Johann_Bayer "wikilink") in his 1603
      *[Uranometria](Uranometria "wikilink")*. The French explorer and
      astronomer [Nicolas Louis de
      Lacaille](Nicolas_Louis_de_Lacaille "wikilink") charted the brighter
      stars and gave their [Bayer designations](Bayer_designation "wikilink")
      in 1756. The constellation stretches from roughly −39 degrees to −57 degrees
      [declination](declination "wikilink"), and from 23.5h to 2.5h of [right
      ascension](right_ascension "wikilink"). The constellations Phoenix,
      [Grus](Grus_(constellation) "wikilink"),
      [Pavo](Pavo_(constellation) "wikilink") and [Tucana](Tucana "wikilink"),
      are known as the Southern Birds.
    questions_and_answers:
      - question: |
          What is the Phoenix constellation?
        answer: |
          Phoenix is a minor constellation in the southern sky.
      - question: |
          Who charted the Phoenix constellation?
        answer: |
          The French explorer and astronomer Nicolas Louis de Lacaille charted its brighter stars in 1756.
      - question: |
          When was Phoenix first depicted on a celestial atlas?
        answer: |
          It first appeared in Johann Bayer’s 1603 *Uranometria*.
      - question: |
          What are the declination and right ascension ranges of Phoenix?
        answer: |
          It spans roughly −39° to −57° declination and 23.5h to 2.5h right ascension.
      - question: |
          Which nearby constellations form the “Southern Birds” along with Phoenix?
        answer: |
          Grus, Pavo, and Tucana.
document_outline: |
  Information about the Phoenix Constellation including its discovery, boundaries, and relation to nearby constellations.
document:
  repo: https://github.com/juliadenham/Summit_knowledge
  commit: 0a1f2672b9b90582e6115333e3ed62fd628f1c0f
  patterns:
    - phoenix_constellation.md
----

. `**version**`: The version of the qna.yaml file, this is the format of the file used for SDG. The value must be the number 3 for this workshop.
. `**created_by**`: Your GitHub username.
. `**domain**`: Specify the category of the knowledge.
. `**seed_examples**`: A collection of key/value entries.
.. `**context**`: A chunk of information from the knowledge document. Each qna.yaml needs five context blocks and has a maximum word count of 500 words.
.. `**questions_and_answers**`: The parameter that holds your questions and answers
... `**question**`: Specify a question for the model. Each qna.yaml file needs at least three question and answer pairs per context chunk with a maximum word count of 250 words.
... `**answer**`: Specify the desired answer from the model. Each qna.yaml file needs at least three question and answer pairs per context chunk with a maximum word count of 250 words.
. `**document_outline**`: Describe an overview of the document your submitting.
. `**document**`: The source of your knowledge contribution.
.. `**repo**`: The URL to your repository that holds your knowledge markdown files.
.. `**commit**`: The SHA of the commit in your repository with your knowledge markdown files.
.. `**patterns**`: A list of glob patterns specifying the markdown files in your repository. Any glob pattern that starts with *, such as *.md, must be quoted due to YAML rules. For example, *.md.

IMPORTANT: To be concise, here we're abbreviating the `questions_and_answers` section to only show a few examples. In practice, you'll need to provide five context blocks, each with at least three question and answer pairs. This ensures the model has a rich set of examples to learn from.

While adding to the taxonomy, it's also important to include sources to the contribution you are providing. This is important for providing transparency and traceability to the model, and as an example, we'd typically include an `attribution.txt` file in the same directory as the `qna.yaml` file. This file should include the following:

[source,yaml]
----
Title of work: Phoenix (constellation)
Link to work: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phoenix_(constellation)
Revision: https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Phoenix_(constellation)&oldid=1237187773
License of the work: CC-BY-SA-4.0
Creator names: Wikipedia Authors
----


//— Generating Synthetic Data
[[generate-synthetic-data]]
== Let’s Generate Synthetic Data!

Now that you've curated your seed examples (`qna.yaml` files), it's time to expand them into a rich training dataset using InstructLab’s Synthetic Data Generation (SDG) pipeline.

In the *Lower Terminal*, run:

[source,bash]
----
ilab generate
----

This will use a "teacher" model to generate dozens of new Q&A examples based on the patterns in your `qna.yaml` file. These synthetic examples are automatically aligned with your taxonomy and formatted to train the model effectively.

Once generation completes, your new dataset will be located inside:

[source,bash]
----
taxonomy/knowledge/[your-domain]/[subdomain]/generated/
----



//— Fine‑Tuning The Model
[[fine-tuning-model]]
== Fine‑Tuning The Model With Our New Dataset

With your synthetic data ready, let’s move on to fine-tuning.

Fine-tuning trains the model in multiple phases:

* *General phase* – Aligns with broadly applicable skills.
* *Specialized phase* – Sharpens the model with enterprise-specific tasks (in our case, 404 Airlines policies and procedures).

In the *Lower Terminal*, run:

[source,bash]
----
ilab train
----

The model will begin consuming the synthetic dataset and gradually adjust its internal weights. This may take several minutes depending on your hardware.

Behind the scenes, InstructLab uses QLoRA, a lightweight fine-tuning method that makes training feasible on consumer-grade GPUs or CPUs.

Once complete, your newly fine-tuned model will be saved in the following directory:

[source,bash]
----
models/
----


//— Testing The Model
[[testing-model]]
== Testing the Model’s Responses

Now it’s time to interact with the model and see what it learned.

In the *Upper Terminal*, start the model server:

[source,bash]
----
ilab serve --model-path ./models/<your-finetuned-model>.gguf
----

Once the model is running, activate your Python environment in another terminal window:

[source,bash]
----
source venv/bin/activate
----

Then launch an interactive chat session:

[source,bash]
----
ilab chat
----

Try asking 404 Airlines-specific questions like:

[source,text]
----
What’s the maximum carry-on size for economy passengers?
How does 404 Airlines handle refunds for weather-related cancellations?
----

Observe how well the model responds. If answers are inaccurate or incomplete, revisit your `qna.yaml` examples or review your taxonomy structure for improvements.
