content/modules/ROOT/pages/index.adoc, before:

= {lab_name}

The `lab_name` var, known as an asciidoc attribute, above was set in `./content/antora.yml` and can be used to set the lab_name or title of your content.
You are both free to change its value and if you prefer to use a different var name, you can change the value of `lab_name`, for example to `title` in `./content/antora.yml` and then reference it in your content as `\{title}`. +

image::rhel-logo-black.jpg[rhel-logo-black,55%,55%]

== Variables

Other vars can also be set there, such as `ssh_user` and `ssh_password`, and referenced inline in the lab content by using the `\{foo}` syntax.

This is another var, or asciidoc attribute, from `./content/antora.yml` {my_var}

== Writing your lab

Whatever type of content you are writing we'll refer to your *content* as "your lab" in this document.

=== Lab structure

Wether you are writing a lab

* First, we will build a monolithic application already compiled as RPM packages and put it into a container. This will allow us to deploy the application, copy it between machines, and update it separately from the operating system. This process affords us a portable and easily maintained component instead of tightly coupling the application with your operating system maintenance.

* In closing we will build a second container on a different operating system version that makes an application not packaged into RPMs. This will be similar to a web application deployment, positioning the correct files at the right locations. To do this, we will pull a project from GitHub and position the component files within our container image. The purpose of this is to achieve a portable application container that can deploy on several different versions of Red Hat Enterprise Linux. This also provides the benefit of decoupling your application maintenance, which would all happen by building new containers versus operating system maintenance. The container is no longer reliant on the operating system installed on the machine where the application is deployed.

. Now let's examine this cluster a bit more by describing the cluster (the `$GUID` environment variable is already set for you so you can immediately describe your individual cluster):
+
[source,sh,role=execute]
----
podman ps
----
+
.Sample Output
[source,texinfo,subs="attributes"]
----
CONTAINER ID  IMAGE                        COMMAND           CREATED      STATUS      PORTS                 NAMES
2dcfee9e50c4  docker.io/library/httpd:2.4  httpd-foreground  3 hours ago  Up 3 hours  0.0.0.0:8080->80/tcp  showroom-httpd
----

=== Lab Access

The terminal window to your right is *already* logged into the lab environment as the `{ssh_user}` user via `ssh`. 
All steps of this lab are to be completed as the `{ssh_user}` user.

Commit message:

Add comprehensive labs for building and managing applications with containers
- Created module-01.adoc for building an application with RPMs, including steps for downloading UBI, installing repositories, and committing container images.
- Created module-02.adoc for managing applications from GitHub, detailing the installation of prerequisites, enabling services, and deploying a web application.
- Added environment.adoc to describe the interactive workshop environment, including terminal setup and VSCode usage.
- Introduced foundation-models.adoc to explain LLM limitations and customization approaches, highlighting fine-tuning and RAG techniques.
- Updated index-old.adoc to clarify lab structure and access instructions for users.
- Developed use-case.adoc to outline the workshop scenario centered around 404 Airlines, addressing AI challenges and the benefits of InstructLab.

content/modules/ROOT/pages/index.adoc, after:

// modules/ROOT/pages/workshop.adoc
= Welcome to the workshop!
:page-nav-title: Workshop Intro
:page-description: Hands‑on lab on customizing LLMs using InstructLab

Thank you for joining this hands‑on lab focused on customizing large language models (LLMs) using InstructLab! InstructLab is an open‑source project licensed under Apache 2.0, leveraging the same link:https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.01081[Large‑scale Alignment for chatBots (LAB)] methodology utilized by Red Hat’s enterprise‑grade AI solutions. Today, we’ll explore how to effectively apply InstructLab’s powerful tools—including Retrieval‑Augmented Generation (RAG), alignment tuning, and synthetic data generation (SDG)—to cook up the perfect model!

== What you’ll be learning in today’s workshop

Today, you’ll walk through the full process of adapting a foundation model to better understand and respond to your unique data—no deep ML background required.

By the end of the session, you’ll be able to:

* Prepare Markdown and qna.yaml datasets for fine‑tuning
* Generate high‑quality synthetic data using InstructLab’s automated SDG pipeline
* Fine‑tune foundation models such as Mistral & Granite
* Evaluate your model’s responses and validate their alignment with your enterprise data
* Serve and use your customized AI model locally on consumer‑grade hardware

== Model Customization with InstructLab and Red Hat Enterprise Linux AI

Today, we’ll work with InstructLab, a community‑driven, open‑source tool designed for local experimentation and customization. InstructLab leverages the original LAB methodology (SDG 1.0) to help you build precise, instruction‑following models through a streamlined synthetic data generation and fine‑tuning workflow.

InstructLab highlights:

* Uses the SDG 1.0 pipeline with simple flows for cleaning and aligning data  
* Supports quantized models and *consumer‑grade/laptop hardware* +  
  Fine‑tunes using *QLoRA* or *LoRA* on top of models like Mistral 7B  
* Great for experimentation and learning on BYO setups (CPU/GPU)

In contrast, Red Hat Enterprise Linux AI uses the same core methodology but with SDG 1.5, which introduces agentic flows, production‑grade fine‑tuning on full‑resolution models, and out‑of‑the‑box hardware optimizations for enterprise scale.

This workshop will show you how to build and refine models using InstructLab—so you can later scale or transition those workflows into an enterprise environment if needed.
